# cellsociety 

* Matthew Dickson, Natalie Huffman, and Owen Smith worked on the project together. We were team 12.  
* We started the project on September 19th and finished on October 2nd. As a whole group over the course of the two weeks, we estimate that we spent 100 hours on the project.   
* Matthew's role was to work on the backend, which involved working a lot on the CellGroup class and its abstractions. He was also involved in exception handling for the XML configurations, making multiple simulations, and building the Game, our main, class. He made test classes for all of the different simulations.   
Natalie's role mainly involved the Game class and integrating a lot of the backend and frontend into a single, cohesive work. She devoted a lot of time to the UI event handlers and text file parsing to put titles and labels on everything in the UI. She also managed to add new triangular and hexagonal neighbors.  
Owen's role was to set up the XML parsing, user interface, and visualization aspects of the project, such as the graph. He worked on testing the UI and XML parsers too.  
Finally, everyone worked on constantly refactoring the code and fixing bugs.   
* We used the example_xml project that Robert Duvall made to make our versions of xml parsing and exception throwing for the project. We also consulted online Java documentation and StackOverflow for areas such as xml parsing and making the graph.  
* The file used to start the project is in the main class, SplashScreen.java.  
* We used several files in the testers package. We expect our program to be able to recognize invalid file extensions and invalid file data for both the XML and text files we parsed. We also expect our program to handle incomplete or invalid UIs. We also expect our program to handle canceling the saving of the current state of the cells to an XML file.  
* We have various data files that our program depends on. We have XML files that set up the configurations for each kind of simulation. We also have two text files that provide the text that will be displayed in the UI.  
* It is important to know what the different tags in the XML files mean. gridShape allows for square, triangle, or hexagon shapes. neigh indicates how many of the surrounding neighbors would be updated. Torus allows for a wrap-around neighborhood. CellDist indicates how many of each celltype there should be in the program. Alternatively, the user can begin listing individual cells for which they would like to specific their starting states.   
* Initially, we set up our XML files to record the number of cells of each state the user wanted in the simulation and then made a random algorithm to assign the given number of cells those states. Now our features are improved such that the XML files can be more flexible in the inputs they receive for the configuration: they can do the three additional features. We also assumed for some instances that if the user closed the file chooser, then they meant to cancel them choosing a file instead of re-prompting them to choose again.   
* A bug in the program is canceling the file chooser for loading the files. The start/resume/pause button does not always have the correct text as well.  
* We were able to implement all of the addition features except for the following: the three simulations after RPS, infinite (scrolling) neighbors, some stylings of the simulation (for instance, directions of neighbors).   
* We thought the project was difficult and time consuming, but definitely challenging and intellectually stimulating. A lot of abstractions and generalizations were required for the project that some of us hadn't had experience with before, and some of us didn't have experience writing this much code with these many working pieces. Communication was good but at times it was difficult because of, for example, possible merge conflicts when one partner was working on the same class another partner was working on.   

